This chapter focused mainly on the availability part of the CIA triad and the importance of maintaining availability for business operations. Maintaining business operations during or after an incident, event, breach, intrusion, exploit or zero day is accomplished through the implementation of Incident Response, Business Continuity (BC), and/or Disaster Recovery (DR) plans. While these three plans may seem to overlap in scope, they are three distinct plans that are vital to the survival of any organization facing out of the ordinary operating conditions. Here are the primary things to remember from this chapter:

First, the Incident Response plan responds to abnormal operating conditions to keep the business operating. The four main components of Incident Response are: Preparation; Detection and Analysis; Containment, Eradication and Recovery; and Post-Incident Activity. Incident Response teams are typically a cross-functional group of individuals who represent the management, technical and functional areas of responsibility most directly impacted by a security incident. The team is trained on incident response and the organization’s incident response plan. When an incident occurs, the team is responsible for determining the amount and scope of damage and whether any confidential information was compromised, implementing recovery procedures to restore security and recover from incident-related damage, and supervising implementation of future measures to improve security and prevent recurrence of the incident.

Second, the Business Continuity plan is designed to keep the organization operating through the crisis. Components of the Business Continuity plan include details about how and when to enact the plan and notification systems and call trees for alerting the team members and organizational associates that the plan has been enacted. In addition, it includes contact numbers for contacting critical third-party partners, external emergency providers, vendors and customers. The plan provides the team with immediate response procedures and checklists and guidance for management.

Finally, when both the Incident Response and Business Continuity (BC) plans fail, the Disaster Recovery (DR) plan is activated to return operations to normal as quickly as possible. The Disaster Recovery (DR) plan may include the following components: executive summary providing a high-level overview of the plan, department-specific plans, technical guides for IT personnel responsible for implementing and maintaining critical backup systems, full copies of the plan for critical disaster recovery team members, and checklists for certain individuals.